The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Real Question as to Altar Lights,
by Edward J. Phipps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Real Question as to Altar Lights
       Christ's Body Present by Consecration, and Offered in the
       Sacrament of the Altar

Author: Edward J. Phipps

Release Date: January 24, 2022 [eBook #67247]

Language: English

Produced by: Mark C. Orton, Thomas Frost and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from scanned images of public domain material from
             the Google Books project.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REAL QUESTION AS TO ALTAR
LIGHTS ***






THE REAL QUESTION

AS TO

ALTAR LIGHTS.

  CHRIST’S BODY PRESENT BY CONSECRATION, AND
  OFFERED IN THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR.


A LETTER

TO

THE REV. JOHN W. H. MOLYNEUX,

BY

EDWARD J. PHIPPS,

RECTOR OF STANSFIELD.


  LONDON:
  LONGMANS, GREEN, READER AND DYER.

  SUDBURY: HENRY S. PRATT.
  1865.




  _Stansfield Rectory, Oct. 13th, 1865._

  MY DEAR MR. MOLYNEUX,

I have read with much interest your correspondence with the Bishop
of Ely on the subject of Altar Lights, and as the course which the
Bishop has taken, makes it of serious importance to every clergyman,
especially to those in the diocese of Ely, I have been giving it my
best consideration.

I believe the facts were as follows:--The Bishop had given notice to
hold a confirmation in S. Peter’s Church, Sudbury, on the 1st May last,
being the festival of S. Philip and S. James.

According to your custom you prepared for the celebration of the Holy
Communion, and as the Bishop was staying at your house, informed him of
it, of course anticipating his attendance.

His Lordship, however, intimated that he understood you had Lights
on the Altar at the Communion, that he objected to them, and in
consequence, after discussing the matter with you, ended by absenting
himself altogether from the service.

Some time after, his Lordship sends you Dr. Twiss’s opinion as given
in your correspondence--pronounces Altar Lights illegal, and informs
you that though he acquits you of wilful disobedience on account of
your ignorance of the Law, yet that no other course was open to him but
that which he had adopted, viz., to abstain from Communion with you,
and therefore in future, with any other clergyman who may presume to
introduce or retain them.

I am moreover informed that in accordance with this arrangement, his
Lordship has intimated his intention to transfer the place of holding
his visitation at Sudbury, from S. Peter’s to All Saints, that is
to say from a Church where to say nothing more, Morning and Evening
Prayer are said daily throughout the year, to a Church where this most
positive and essential Law of the Church, is wholly and habitually set
at nought.

I certainly had not considered that the question of Altar Lights was of
such vital importance. The Bishop has not even personal knowledge of
their being used, and yet without even complaint made, without legal
investigation or trial, you are at once subjected to the heaviest
punishment it is in the power of the Church to inflict--you are cut off
from Communion with your Bishop, _ipso facto_ excommunicate.

This result makes it, I repeat, highly important that it should be
thoroughly ascertained, whether and upon what grounds Altar Lights are
illegal.

I believe the ordinary authority quoted for the use of Altar Lights, is
that they were “in use” in the second year of Edward VI., and that the
Rubric of our present Common Prayer, directs all such ornaments to be
retained, as were “in use” in that year by authority of Parliament.

In the case of Liddell _v._ Beal, the Crown by its supremacy has
decided that the ornaments here spoken of are confined to those
articles the use of which is prescribed by the first Book of Edward VI.

It will be seen on reference to that Book, that the articles so
prescribed are The Altar--Vestments, copes, albe, surplices, tunicles,
corporals, paten, chalice, and some other things.

Altar Lights are not mentioned amongst them, and therefore cannot
according to this decision be supported by this Rubric.

But the advisers of the Crown in the above case, intimate their
opinion, that there were other things lawfully in use, though not
supported by express parliamentary authority, such as crosses, bells,
organs, &c.

And it would seem therefore, that it is upon this ground that Altar
Lights are to be supported.

In virtue of the supremacy transferred by parliament to the crown, all
ecclesiastical powers before exercised by the Pope, have been claimed
and exercised by the Sovereign. And on the accession of Edward VI.,
Injunctions were issued, and Commissioners appointed by the Crown, to
visit and reform all Churches throughout England.

Amongst the injunctions so issued, was one expressly directing two
Lights to be kept upon the Altar. And by no subsequent authority,
either of the Crown or Parliament, have these Lights been directed to
be removed.

In common with all other good church observances, they have at
various times, been violently opposed. Queen Elizabeth, however, “that
bright occidental star,” King James I. and the successive English
Sovereigns, have uniformly continued them in the Royal Chapels--they
were constantly in use in the chapels of Laud--Bishop Andrewes (a
predecessor of the Bishop of Ely) and Lord Burleigh--and they are to be
found still, on the Altars of, I believe, all the Cathedrals, and most
of the Collegiate and greater Churches of the Land.

There is indeed one peculiarity connected with the present use of them;
the Church prescribes _Lights_, the present practice proscribes Lights,
and sets up “dead lights,” (_un_lighted candles). Whether this proceeds
from that slovenly and irreverent carelessness, which has crept into so
many of our Church arrangements, or from that weak and miserable system
of compromise, which never does and never ought to succeed, it is
equally to be deprecated. If the Law orders Lights, to have candles and
not to light them is to disobey the Law. It reminds me of the “guinea
in the pocket with strict injunctions never to change it”--of the sage
conclusion of the humorous poem, “When nose used the spectacles, eyes
should be shut;” it becomes thus an idle vanity, and an inconsistent
unlawful superstition.

Besides, the subject of Altar Lights has been regularly mooted in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and no question made of their legality. Dr.
Twiss, indeed, in a curt and obscure statement, says the injunction
does not apply to Communion Tables. I confess I cannot see upon what
grounds he makes this assertion, or rather perhaps I do not comprehend
what he means by it. If it is intended to say that the Altar is taken
away, and therefore all that is commanded to be set upon it is taken
away also, in that case the Holy Sacrament itself must disappear, for
the command is express also, to set the Holy Elements upon the Altar.

But in truth, is there any sufficient authority to be quoted, for the
abolition of Altars throughout England? The Crown order to Ridley in
1550, was for his own diocese alone. The order in 1559, was, for the
setting up Communion Tables where Altars had been violently pulled
down; and I am not aware, that any other Crown or Parliamentary
authority has ever directed the destruction of English Altars.

And here I think we ought to be on our guard, against being led away
by irregular proceedings, or the opinions and acts of individuals. The
only authorities which can bind the English Church are the Crown and
Parliament.

No violent acts of mobs--no opinions of “Reformers,” even though called
“Venerable,” are of the slightest legal force in determining doctrine
or practice; legal, political and religious reformers may all be of
use in their generation, but their acts and opinions are those of
individuals, and nothing more.

And if the acts and opinions of religious reformers of a past
generation, are to be considered, why are we to shut out those of
the reformers of this present reforming generation? Why “build the
sepulchres of the Prophets” and despise or persecute their successors?
In the very matter of “ornaments” now in question, we hear of the
Bishops of Oxford and Salisbury each assuming the ancient ensign
of their office--the pastoral staff. Only a short time since the
Archdeacon of Sudbury, himself a Venerable Reformer in the Church,
introduced the Queen of Hawaii at Bury, and pleaded for the Church
Mission established in those islands. And yet a few weeks before at
the confirmation of the young King of Hawaii the Anglican Bishop was
vested in albe and cope, mitred, with episcopal ring and pastoral
staff. And this is also as it ought to be. As majesty without its
externals is a jest, so religion has no right to dispense with them.

Under these circumstances I cannot but think that there is amply
sufficient _prima facie_ evidence, to warrant an honest belief that you
have legal authority for your Altar Lights--and I confess, therefore,
that I cannot understand why the very suspicion of adopting them,
should cut off a Priest from Communion with his Bishop.

But by far the most important aspect of this question, is that in
connection with the doctrine of the Holy Eucharist.

Independently of its being an obedience to the Law, you, with many
others, have restored Lights to their place on the Altar, as a much
needed aid to revive something of that reverence and faith which is
so grievously deficient in the English Church. I believe they have
a certain limited power in conducing to this end. But a far more
powerful, indeed as I think, the only efficient means, under God, of
creating faith and reverence, is to have a clear, definite, positive,
belief ourselves, and to endeavour to express it in the simplest and
plainest language.

There is no doctrine on which plain unmistakable language is more
necessary, than that of the Holy Eucharist.

I fear a vast number of Church people do not know what to believe.
A great multitude of poor honest people believe the Eucharist to be
nothing but a simple ceremony, and not a few, even of the clergy,
believe the very contrary to the truth.

Formerly, in my recollection, to believe in the Real Presence, was
universally held to be the distinguishing and erroneous doctrine of
Catholics, in opposition to Protestants. We have now advanced so far
as to teach a Presence, which however no one can understand to be a
Presence, obscured as it is with terms of “a spiritual presence,” and
“the means of apprehending it being faith.”

And thus in our Communion, the great service of the Church is almost
entirely forsaken of the masses of the people, the great bulk of the
people are uncommunicated, and have substituted for the Catholic faith
and religion, a system of mere sermon hearing.

But in reality the true doctrine of the Church is plain enough. The
commanded Elements of Bread and Wine are placed on the Altar, they are
then, simply Bread and Wine; in virtue of the words of Institution or
Consecration they become, and, are Christ’s Body and Blood; present,
not indeed in an ordinary, natural, physical manner, such as our
external senses can take cognizance of, but in a special, mystical,
supernatural manner, as we sometimes call it spiritual; not meaning
hereby, mere spirit, in opposition to body, but as the Apostle tells
us, “there is a spiritual Body.” It is not Christ’s _natural_ Body,
subsisting according to the ordinary operation of what we call the
Laws of Nature, but it is His glorified Body, that Body, which came
suddenly, and stood in the midst of his disciples when the doors were
shut; which vanished out of their sight; which was seen of S. Stephen,
and appeared to S. Paul; the archetype of that perfection, in which our
bodies were first created in the image of God, and to which they shall
be restored and made like when He shall subdue all things to Himself.

The Holy Elements having thus become Christ’s Body, they are the source
of life, and grace, and blessing of every kind, to those who, to use
the divine language, “eat,” become partakers of,--are united with them.

In discoursing of, and admitting the supernatural, we at once put
aside the consideration of physical laws; we at once admit that things
supernatural pass the limits of our finite intelligence. But, as the
Holy Scriptures describe the operations of God to us, in terms of human
comprehension, such as eyes, hands, arms, &c., so in the word “eat,” we
understand not alone a physical perception, but far more. To describe
the divinely appointed method, the external means, the connecting
link, (so to speak) by which the Divine agency is pleased to operate
on Christians, we are bidden to Take, eat, and by it we understand
soul-feeding, a uniting of the glorified Body of Christ with ours.

“He that eateth me shall live by me,” saith our Lord. There is a deep
meaning here; “The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and
they are life.” In this full sense of eating therefore, we understand,
not only the act of “carnally pressing with the teeth, the Sacrament of
Christ’s Body,” as S. Augustine saith (for it _is_ Christ’s Body that
all do so press), but those further dispositions of mind, which enable
Christians to unite with Him, and which are described in the language
of the Church as “a true and lively faith.”

And thus it follows, that they who have not the due dispositions of
mind, obtain not that full and perfect union of Christ’s Body with
their own, which is appointed by our Lord, to be the great Christian
source of life and grace. John vi. 53, 54.

After the elements have been consecrated, they become Christ’s Body.
The “Faith” or qualifications of the receiver have nothing to do with
the Real Supernatural Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; and this
point cannot be too strongly insisted on, when, as at present, the most
solemn and positive doctrines of the Church of all ages and nations,
are concealed, avoided, or explained away, in deference to a miserably
short-sighted policy of expediency, under the name of moderation.

That therefore which has been consecrated--which is “given, taken, and
received” by all communicants, is, as the 28th Article, and the solemn
words of delivery expressly declare--the Body of Christ--and this is
to be understood in the simplest, plainest sense of language without a
shadow of ambiguity or refinement.

To every one receiving therefore, there is a sacramental impartation
of Christ’s Body--to the humble, faithful Penitent, it is not only the
Presence of, but union with his Lord--according to his fitness is the
benefit he receives--“According to your faith be it unto you.”

But to the mocker, the godless, the profane; the actual receiving of
Christ’s Body is no benefit, but rather injury--as was said of the
unbelieving Jews--“Seeing, they see not, and hearing, they hear not.”
So these, eating, they eat not--not having the necessary spiritual
powers and faculties for receiving and uniting themselves with Christ;
they have not that identification of their life with Him, that personal
actual knowledge of Him, in which standeth or consisteth eternal
life--they are like the multitude who thronged and touched our Lord,
deriving no benefit from the contact; not having the simple earnest
faith of the poor woman who touched Him for her disease--they cannot
be made whole by the virtue that proceedeth from Him.

There is another great doctrine, in connection with the Holy Eucharist,
which has of late been grievously neglected; I mean the Doctrine of the
Sacrifice.--

To state this doctrine in full, to discuss and remove objections, would
require a treatise of itself.

Briefly then, I would state, that the sacrificial character of the
Eucharist is perhaps its highest and chief end. The glory of God--the
fulfilment of His will and work, is the supreme object of man’s
existence--man’s own welfare is but secondary. Operating therefore to
counteract the treasonable idolatry with which man serves and loves
the creature rather than the Creator, God has ever instituted certain
material observances by which He has appointed man to recognize and
serve Him, and to become vehicles of Communion with His Creature. Thus,
days have been taken from time--places from the earth--substances and
persons from His creatures, which He has required to be wholly diverted
from their ordinary use, and devoted in special ways to Himself--the
Sabbath--the Sanctuary--the Sacrifice--the Priesthood, were thus
appointed to the Jews--The Lord’s Day--the Parish Church--the Holy
Sacrifice of the Eucharist and the Priesthood--have the same object
and office with us Christians. They are our means of worshipping
and serving God--our first great duty, irrespective of all personal
considerations, although in the merciful Providence of God, our
fulfilment of these obligations, is fraught with the greatest benefit
to ourselves.

On the sacred time then, at the sacred place, we come to offer the
sacred offering; but what shall we bring? Ourselves, our substance, our
devotions, are all imperfect and stained with sin. All were too little
to testify our duty--all utterly impotent to obtain our needs.

In the service then, of the Holy Communion, we offer unto God, an
offering far more precious and acceptable than any earthly object--we
offer, present, the Consecrated elements, the sacred Body of our Lord
supernaturally present, after, and by means of consecration. Before the
Throne of Grace no sacrifice can be so perfect, no plea so prevailing,
as when we interpose between ourselves and the Majesty of God, the
Person of His Adorable Son.

This then, is the great doctrine of the Eucharist--this, the highest
act of religion that we can celebrate; and to assist, be present
at, take part in this great act of religious duty, is the bounden
obligation of every member of the Church.

I do not now attempt to prove these things--they have been, thank God,
repeatedly asserted and enforced by ancient and modern divines of the
greatest piety and learning in the Church of England; nor have any of
the Church Rulers ventured to deny the doctrines, or repress, or punish
those who teach them.

But what is needed, is to have these things set forth in plain
language, “understanded of the people,” in earnest, vigorous, popular
(in the sense of common) methods. If these great doctrines of the
Church were taught in their fulness without reserves and refinements,
the plain honest people would come to understand what the Church meant;
that there was a distinction between the Church and dissent, beyond
personal prejudices and feelings.

If the boundaries were well defined--if the separation was by a wall
(even a low one), instead of a ragged hedge, Churchmen and dissenters
would have fewer occasions of quarrel; for bad boundaries make bad
neighbours: there would be more charity, they might converse amicably,
and shake hands over it, each clearly knowing and keeping within his
limit.

And if the doctrine of the Real Presence were taught, believed, and
felt, there would be less of that grevious, crying sin of irreverence,
which is so lamentably and universally prevalent in the Church; people,
even clergy, now enter a Church without even any attempt to manifest
reverence; they stare about, talk loud, on the most ordinary and
trifling matters; the only attitude you never see them assume is that
of reverence and prayer. In the Churches of the Roman obedience--enter
them when you will--you see people on their knees, absorbed in their
devotions.

Even putting aside the principle of duty, is it wise to persevere
in this system of disingenuous ambiguity? does it commend itself by
its success? The majority of the upper classes (ten thousand they
have been termed) are probably supporters of the Church--Churchmen.
Are the tradesmen and middle classes so? are they not the chief
strength and support of dissent. And the poor people--the masses in
modern phrase--the real life and strength of the nation, as they are
proclaimed to be when their support is needed; are they Churchmen? I
think they are; their humble quiet spirit warms to her teaching, and
only looks for more emphatic and clear enunciation of it.

If the Church rose to the discharge of her duty, plainly taught her
great doctrines, and gave warrant for her sincerity by a speaking and
glorious ritual, then would the people rally to her support.

But at present, though Churchmen, it is to be feared that the masses
are but nominally so. They go to Church where there is no meeting
house; but if one be at hand, they will frequent it, as readily as the
Church. In fact, they are not taught, and they see no difference; and
they are too plain and honest not to act on their convictions.

I do hope then that we may be entering on a better system, a system
of plain dealing, calling things by their own names, irrespective of
possible consequences.

Lord Capel, one of the most consistent and high-minded amongst the
Royalist Leaders under Charles 1st., immediately before his execution
for the defence of Colchester, solemnly charged his family to make Ps.
xxvii. 11, as he always had done, a part of their daily prayers--“Teach
me Thy way O Lord, and lead me in a _plain_ path.”

The question of Altar Lights then derives its whole importance from
its relation to the great doctrines of the Sacrament; they are, as it
were, the Colours of the Regiment, of which the late Sir William Napier
used to say, they were the pivot on which everything turned--Defend
the Colours--Form on the Colours--Recover the Colours, was an appeal
understood by all, and stirred the strongest and deepest energies
of every man. I can only hope in conclusion, that the candles which
you have lighted may “rekindle such a flame in England, as by God’s
blessing, shall never be extinguished,” and only wishing that the first
discussion of the matter had fallen into more learned and abler hands,

  I am, my Dear Mr. Molyneux,
  Yours very sincerely,
  EDWARD J. PHIPPS.


THE END.


6 JA 66




Transcriber’s Note


In this file, text in _italics_ is indicated by underscores.

No changes were made by the transcriber to the text as printed.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REAL QUESTION AS TO ALTAR
LIGHTS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
